docs(MADR): add MeshOpenTelemetryBackend (#15677)
kumahq/kuma: docs/madr/decisions/095-mesh-opentelemetry-backend.md

# Shared telemetry backend resource for observability policies

* Status: accepted

> Technical Story: https://github.com/Kong/kong-mesh/issues/9163

Reviewer: nit/FYI: This links to a private repo (Kong/kong-mesh)

> Technical Story: https://github.com/Kong/kong-mesh/issues/9163

Reviewer: nit/FYI: This links to a private repo (Kong/kong-mesh)

In practice, most deployments point all three policies at the same collector. The endpoint string (`otel-collector.observability:4317`) is duplicated across three policy instances per mesh. When the collector address changes (new namespace, different port), the operator updates three places. In multi-mesh setups, multiply by the number of meshes.

Each policy also has a slightly different OTel backend struct:

| Policy        | OTel backend fields              |
|---------------|----------------------------------|
| MeshMetric    | `endpoint`, `refreshInterval`    |
| MeshTrace     | `endpoint`                       |
| MeshAccessLog | `endpoint`, `attributes`, `body` |

The endpoint is the common denominator. Signal-specific fields (`refreshInterval`, `attributes`, `body`) are unique to each policy and don't belong in a shared resource.

Beyond endpoint duplication, there's a missing abstraction for collector connection settings. Today none of the policies support configuring:

- TLS settings for the collector connection (custom CA, client certs)
- Authentication headers (bearer tokens for managed OTel backends)
- Protocol preference (gRPC vs HTTP) - policies are gRPC-only today

> These would need to be added to all three policies individually, tripling the work and the surface area.

Author: TLS and protocols are consistent across all three - cluster-level TLS via `ClientSideTLS` already, and all three use the same `GrpcService` / `HttpService` Envoy types.

Auth headers are follow-up work. All three go through Envoy - `GrpcService.initial_metadata` and `HttpService.request_headers_to_add` cover MeshTrace and MeshAccessLog, and MeshMetric routes through an HCM proxy listener where headers can be set at the route level. No cherry-picking from the operator's side, the CP handles the translation.

### User stories

- As a mesh operator, I want to deploy one OTel collector (DaemonSet or Deployment) and point MeshMetric, MeshTrace, and MeshAccessLog at it without duplicating the endpoint in three places.
- As a mesh operator, I want to update my collector address in one place when the observability team moves it to a different namespace or changes the port.

> - As a mesh operator using a managed OTel backend (Grafana Cloud, Datadog, etc.), I want to configure a bearer token for collector auth.

Reviewer: This story also covers TLS (custom CA, client certs) and protocol switching (gRPC vs HTTP) for the collector connection - both are key motivations for the shared resource mentioned in the context section but not reflected in the user stories.

```suggestion
- As a mesh operator, I want to configure connection settings (TLS, auth, protocol) for my collector in one place rather than across three policies.
```

> - As a mesh operator using a managed OTel backend (Grafana Cloud, Datadog, etc.), I want to configure a bearer token for collector auth.

Reviewer: This story also covers TLS (custom CA, client certs) and protocol switching (gRPC vs HTTP) for the collector connection - both are key motivations for the shared resource mentioned in the context section but not reflected in the user stories.

```suggestion
- As a mesh operator using a managed OTel backend (Grafana Cloud, Datadog, etc.), I want to configure connection settings (TLS, auth, protocol) for my collector in one place rather than across three policies.
```

> - As a mesh operator running multi-zone, I want each zone to have its own collector config without duplicating endpoints across zone-scoped policies.

Reviewer: So how does that work? You would want to have one policy and the backend to be different in different zones? Is there gonna be some special ref?

> - As a mesh operator, I want to roll out signals incrementally - start with metrics, verify it works, then add tracing and access logging against the same collector.

Reviewer: This is a bit repetitive of #1/#2.

> - As a mesh operator, I want the data plane's OTel export configured from standard `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_*` env vars injected into my pods so I don't duplicate collector config between application instrumentation and the mesh.

Reviewer: This is explicitly out of scope for MVP (noted in the Notes section) - should it be a user story here?

Author: Moved env var auto-detection into initial scope (item 7 in the scope list). It is user story 6 now.

## Design

### Option A: New shared telemetry backend resource (recommended)

Introduce a new mesh-scoped resource `MeshOpenTelemetryBackend` that defines an OTel collector endpoint with connection settings. Observability policies reference it via a `backendRef` field.

#### Resource definition

```yaml
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
metadata:
  name: main-collector
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  # Collector endpoint
  endpoint:
    # Address of the collector (hostname or IP)
    address: otel-collector.observability
    # Port number
    port: 4317
    # Base path prefix for HTTP endpoints. The CP appends the
    # signal-specific suffix (/v1/traces, /v1/metrics, /v1/logs)
    # automatically, matching OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT semantics.
    # Ignored for gRPC.
    # +optional
    path: ""
  # Transport protocol. Drives whether Envoy uses GrpcService or
  # HttpService in the generated xDS config.
  # Values: grpc, http. Default: grpc.
  # +optional
  protocol: grpc
```

> No `type` discriminator - the resource name itself is the type. If other telemetry backend types are needed later (Zipkin, Datadog), they become separate resources (`MeshZipkinBackend`, etc.). The `backendRef.kind` field enforces type matching at the schema level - a policy's OTel backend can only reference a `MeshOpenTelemetryBackend`, not a hypothetical `MeshZipkinBackend`.

Reviewer: What does "at the schema level" mean here exactly? Is this CRD-level validation (kubebuilder enum restricting `kind` values on the field) or runtime validation in the admission webhook? The distinction matters for the implementation - a kubebuilder enum gives you kubectl validation and IDE autocomplete for free, while webhook validation is more flexible but only catches mismatches at apply time.

> No `type` discriminator - the resource name itself is the type. If other telemetry backend types are needed later (Zipkin, Datadog), they become separate resources (`MeshZipkinBackend`, etc.). The `backendRef.kind` field enforces type matching at the schema level - a policy's OTel backend can only reference a `MeshOpenTelemetryBackend`, not a hypothetical `MeshZipkinBackend`.

Reviewer: What does "at the schema level" mean here exactly? Is this CRD-level validation (kubebuilder enum restricting `kind` values on the field) or runtime validation in the admission webhook?

> No `type` discriminator - the resource name itself is the type. If other telemetry backend types are needed later (Zipkin, Datadog), they become separate resources (`MeshZipkinBackend`, etc.). The `backendRef.kind` field enforces type matching at the schema level - a policy's OTel backend can only reference a `MeshOpenTelemetryBackend`, not a hypothetical `MeshZipkinBackend`.

Author: Reworded to "via the admission webhook". The validator rejects backendRef.kind values that don't match the enclosing backend type.

> The `endpoint` is structured (address + port + path) instead of a raw string so we validate each component separately. Today MeshMetric/MeshAccessLog split the endpoint string on `:`, and MeshTrace has an unreleased URL parser for HTTP endpoints that's being removed. A structured format avoids these inconsistencies.

Reviewer: The structured `endpoint` (address + port + path) is a nice improvement over the raw `host:port` strings the existing policies use. Any plans to adopt this structured format for other fields across the codebase that currently take URLs or host:port strings, or is this a one-off for the new resource?

  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Mesh
  default:
    backends:
    - type: OpenTelemetry
      openTelemetry:
        backendRef:
          kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
          name: main-collector
        attributes:              # signal-specific, stays inline
        - key: mesh
          value: "%KUMA_MESH%"
```

#### Required policy changes

None of the current policy OTel backend structs have a `backendRef` field. Today they only have an inline `endpoint` string:

- MeshMetric `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint` + `refreshInterval`
- MeshTrace `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint`
- MeshAccessLog `OtelBackend`: `endpoint` + `attributes` + `body`

Each struct needs a new optional `backendRef` field. The inline `endpoint` remains supported but is deprecated starting in 2.14 and will be removed in 3.0. Validation enforces mutual exclusivity: either `endpoint` or `backendRef`, not both.

```go
// In each policy's OTel backend struct
type OpenTelemetryBackend struct {
    // Inline endpoint (existing, backward compatible)
    Endpoint string `json:"endpoint,omitempty"`
    // OR reference to shared backend

>     BackendRef *common_api.TargetRef `json:"backendRef,omitempty"`

Reviewer: The Go snippet uses `*common_api.TargetRef` for the `backendRef` field. The existing `BackendRef` type in routing policies (`api/common/v1alpha1/targetref.go`) is a different struct that extends `TargetRef` with `Weight` and `Port` fields.

Using `TargetRef` directly makes sense here since weight/port are irrelevant for a telemetry backend reference - but it's worth being explicit about this in the MADR since readers familiar with the routing `BackendRef` might assume that's what's being used. A one-line note like "This uses `TargetRef` directly (not the routing `BackendRef` struct) since weight/port don't apply" would prevent confusion.

>     BackendRef *common_api.TargetRef `json:"backendRef,omitempty"`

Reviewer: The existing `BackendRef` type in routing policies is a different struct that extends `TargetRef` with `Weight` and `Port` fields. Using `TargetRef` directly makes sense since weight/port don't apply - worth making that explicit.

```suggestion
    // Uses TargetRef directly, not the routing BackendRef struct (weight/port don't apply)
    BackendRef *common_api.TargetRef `json:"backendRef,omitempty"`
```

    // ... signal-specific fields unchanged
}
```

#### Resolution during xDS generation

1. CP loads all MeshOpenTelemetryBackend resources into MeshContext (same as MeshService, MeshExternalService)
2. During policy plugin's `Apply()`:
   - If `backendRef` is set: look up MeshOpenTelemetryBackend by name from `ctx.Mesh.Resources.MeshLocalResources`
   - Extract endpoint from `spec.endpoint`
   - Convert to the same `*core_xds.Endpoint` struct used today
3. Proceed with existing cluster/listener creation - no changes downstream

This follows the same pattern as TargetRef resolution in policies (`pkg/plugins/policies/core/rules/resolve/targetref.go`).

#### Resource characteristics

| Property        | Value                                                                                |
|-----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `IsPolicy`      | false (it's a resource, not a policy)                                                |
| `Scope`         | Mesh                                                                                 |

> | `HasStatus`     | false                                                                                |

Reviewer: Unlike routing where a dropped backend is one of many weighted destinations and traffic still flows, a dropped telemetry backend means the signal is entirely lost with no user-visible feedback (only a CP Info log). Should `HasStatus` be `true` so the resource or referencing policies can surface unresolved backendRefs?

2. As a mesh operator, I want to update my collector address in one place when the observability team moves it to a different namespace or changes the port.
3. As a mesh operator using a managed OTel backend (Grafana Cloud, Datadog, etc.), I want to configure connection settings (TLS, auth, protocol) for my collector in one place rather than across three policies.
4. As a mesh operator running multi-zone, I want each zone to have its own collector config without duplicating endpoints across zone-scoped policies.
5. As a mesh operator, I want to know when a policy references a backend that no longer exists so I don't silently lose telemetry.

## Design

### Option A: New shared telemetry backend resource (recommended)

Introduce a new mesh-scoped resource `MeshOpenTelemetryBackend` that defines an OTel collector endpoint with connection settings. Observability policies reference it via a `backendRef` field.

#### Resource definition

```yaml
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
metadata:
  name: main-collector
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  endpoint:
    address: otel-collector.observability
    port: 4317

>     path: ""        # +optional, base path prefix for HTTP (ignored for gRPC)

Reviewer: shouldn't this be rejected by validation and not ignored?

- `MeshOTelBackend` - abbreviation is less readable than the full name
- `MeshOTelCollector` - "collector" is one deployment model, the resource is for any telemetry-receiving endpoint
- `MeshObservabilityBackend` - too abstract, doesn't add clarity over the specific protocol name
- `MeshCollectorBackend` - not all backends are "collectors" (e.g., managed SaaS endpoints)

#### Signal-specific fields stay in policies

MeshAccessLog's `body` field is logs-only (OTel LogRecord body). It holds Envoy access log command operators (`%START_TIME%`, `%UPSTREAM_HOST%`) that control what each log record says. This is per-record content formatting, not connection config - it stays in MeshAccessLog.

MeshAccessLog's `attributes` are also logs-only (mapped to OTel `KeyValueList` with command operator substitution). MeshTrace has `Tags` (mapped to Envoy `CustomTag` on the HCM tracing config). MeshMetric has no OTel attributes (uses kuma-dp `ExtraLabels`). Each signal uses a completely different Envoy mechanism for attributes, so there's no shared abstraction that works across all three.

> #### OTel env var auto-detection (considered and dropped)

Author: Not low-hanging. For MeshMetric (kuma-dp OTel SDK), we could inject `service.name` and `service.namespace` as OTel resource attributes using kuma-dp's own `DataplaneMetadata` - that part is straightforward. For MeshTrace and MeshAccessLog (Envoy's built-in exporters), the Envoy OTel exporter config doesn't currently have a place for resource attributes in the xDS API we use. Either way, the harder problem is the value: kuma.io/service is a tag-based composite (`app_namespace`), not a plain `service.name`. We'd need a convention for mapping. Out of scope for this MADR - agreed it's worth a follow-up issue.

The OTLP/HTTP spec defines two content encodings: binary protobuf (`application/x-protobuf`) and JSON (`application/json`). Envoy's built-in OTel extensions (stats sink, access logger, tracer) only support protobuf encoding over HTTP. JSON encoding is not available in Envoy without a custom filter. So `protocol: http` means OTLP/HTTP with protobuf encoding. If JSON encoding support is needed later, a separate `encoding` field can be added to the spec.

When `protocol: http`, the `path` field is a base path prefix. The CP appends the signal-specific suffix (`/v1/traces`, `/v1/metrics`, `/v1/logs`) during xDS generation, matching how the OTel SDK handles `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT`. An empty path means the standard paths are used directly. For gRPC, paths are irrelevant - gRPC routes by protobuf service name.

#### Policy reference

> Each policy's OTel backend gets an optional `backendRef` field. When set, the endpoint comes from the referenced MeshOpenTelemetryBackend. Signal-specific fields remain inline.

Author: Clarified this. `backendRef` stays optional in 2.14, then becomes required in 3.0 when the inline `endpoint` is removed.

  default:
    backends:
    - type: OpenTelemetry
      openTelemetry:
        backendRef:
          kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
          name: main-collector
        attributes:              # signal-specific, stays inline
        - key: mesh
          value: "%KUMA_MESH%"
```

#### Required policy changes

None of the current policy OTel backend structs have a `backendRef` field. Today they only have an inline `endpoint` string:

- MeshMetric `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint` + `refreshInterval`
- MeshTrace `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint`
- MeshAccessLog `OtelBackend`: `endpoint` + `attributes` + `body`

Each struct needs a new optional `backendRef` field. The inline `endpoint` remains supported but is deprecated starting in 2.14 and will be removed in 3.0. Validation enforces mutual exclusivity: either `endpoint` or `backendRef`, not both.

```go
// In each policy's OTel backend struct
type OpenTelemetryBackend struct {
    // Inline endpoint (existing, backward compatible)
    Endpoint string `json:"endpoint,omitempty"`
    // OR reference to shared backend.
    // Uses TargetRef directly, not the routing BackendRef struct
    // (weight/port don't apply here).

>     BackendRef *common_api.TargetRef `json:"backendRef,omitempty"`

Author: Right, this is not a `TargetRef`. I changed the design to use `common_api.BackendResourceRef`, since this is a typed resource reference, not policy matching.

    // ... signal-specific fields unchanged
}
```

#### Resolution during xDS generation

1. CP loads all MeshOpenTelemetryBackend resources into MeshContext (same as MeshService, MeshExternalService).
2. During policy plugin's `Apply()`:
   - If `backendRef` is set: look up the resource by name from `ctx.Mesh.Resources.MeshLocalResources`.
   - If `spec.endpoint` is set: use its address and port directly.
   - If `spec.nodeEndpoint` is set: resolve node IP from `proxy.Metadata.DynamicMetadata["HOST_IP"]`; fall back to `127.0.0.1` on Universal/VM.
3. Inline `endpoint` path: CP generates a standard static Envoy cluster pointing directly at the collector. MeshTrace and MeshAccessLog use Envoy's built-in OTel exporters (`envoy.tracers.opentelemetry`, `envoy.access_loggers.open_telemetry`) over gRPC. Unchanged from current behavior.
4. `backendRef` path - kuma-dp pipe mode: when `backendRef` is set and the proxy advertises `FeatureOtelViaKumaDp`, MeshTrace and MeshAccessLog route through kuma-dp via Unix sockets:
   ```
   Envoy --gRPC--> Unix socket --> kuma-dp otelreceiver --> gRPC or HTTP --> OTel Collector
   ```

>    CP configures a `pipe`-type Envoy cluster per signal (socket paths from `OtelTraceSocketName()` / `OtelLogSocketName()`). kuma-dp runs gRPC receivers on those sockets and forwards to the collector using the protocol and address from the MOTB spec. kuma-dp reads backend config from dynconf routes (`/meshtrace`, `/meshaccesslog`), which return JSON with `socketPath`, `endpoint`, `useHTTP`, and `path`. ETag caching avoids reconnects on unchanged config.

Author: Clarified this to use a single `/otel` dynconf route for `backendRef` backends. The per-signal route split is no longer part of the design.

```yaml
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshAccessLog
metadata:
  name: all-access-logs
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  targetRef:
    kind: Mesh
  default:
    backends:
      - type: OpenTelemetry
        openTelemetry:
          backendRef:
            kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
            name: main-collector
          attributes: # signal-specific, stays inline
            - key: mesh
              value: "%KUMA_MESH%"
```

#### Required policy changes

None of the current policy OTel backend structs have a `backendRef` field. Today they only have an inline `endpoint` string:

- MeshMetric `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint` + `refreshInterval`
- MeshTrace `OpenTelemetryBackend`: `endpoint`
- MeshAccessLog `OtelBackend`: `endpoint` + `attributes` + `body`

Each struct needs a new optional `backendRef` field. The inline `endpoint` remains supported but is deprecated starting in 2.14 and will be removed in 3.0. Validation enforces mutual exclusivity: either `endpoint` or `backendRef`, not both. When inline `endpoint` is used, the implementation should also emit a deprecation warning so operators see the migration path before 3.0.

> Use `common_api.BackendResourceRef`, not `TargetRef`. This is a typed resource reference (`kind` + `name`), not policy matching. `backendRef.name` is the operator-facing resource name (what the operator typed when creating the resource). KDS syncs MeshOpenTelemetryBackend to zones, but the synced resource name gets a hash suffix (same as all mesh-scoped resources without `SkipKDSHash`). The `kuma.io/display-name` label preserves the original name through sync, so the CP resolves `backendRef.name` by matching against `kuma.io/display-name`, falling back to direct name match for locally-created resources. This follows the same pattern as `GetDisplayName()` used throughout the codebase for KDS-synced resources.

Author: Agreed. `BackendResourceRef` now has `kind`, `name`, and `labels`. `name` means `metadata.name` only, `labels` for cross-zone. Same pattern as MeshHTTPRoute.

5. MeshMetric path: MeshMetric still keeps its `/meshmetric` dynconf route, but only for scrape-side config such as applications, sidecar stats settings, extra labels, and Prometheus state. OTEL backend runtime for metrics, including socket selection and OTEL export `refreshInterval`, comes from `/otel` together with traces and logs. In short, `/meshmetric` answers "what should I scrape" and `/otel` answers "where and how should I export". Inline `endpoint` backends stay on the direct Envoy path and do not use `/otel`.

> 

Author: Misread your earlier comment, you're right. Updated the MADR: CP skips the backendRef backend and logs a warning when the proxy doesn't have FeatureOtelViaKumaDp. No fallback.

```yaml
# Global CP - syncs to all zones via KDS
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
metadata:
  name: zone-collector
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  endpoint:
    address: otel-collector.observability.svc.cluster.local
    port: 4317
  protocol: grpc
# Policies also created on Global CP, synced to all zones.
# Each zone's DNS resolves the address to its local collector.
```

When zones need different collector addresses (separate cloud regions, different infrastructure), use zone-specific backend names:

```yaml
# Global CP
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
metadata:
  name: collector-us-east
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  endpoint:
    address: collector.us-east.internal
    port: 4317
  protocol: grpc
---
apiVersion: kuma.io/v1alpha1
kind: MeshOpenTelemetryBackend
metadata:
  name: collector-eu-west
  namespace: kuma-system
  labels:
    kuma.io/mesh: default
spec:
  endpoint:
    address: collector.eu-west.internal
    port: 4317
  protocol: grpc
---

> # Zone-targeted policy

Reviewer 2: Can this be just defined in the zone?

Author: Yes, zone CPs can create backends directly. KDS syncs them via ZoneToGlobalFlag. Updated the example to show both paths.
